Security and compatibility model
################################

This page defines what the local license verifier is expected to defend
against, what it does not defend against, and how existing version 200 license
files are handled.

Threat model
============

Licensecc verifies local, signed license files in a customer-controlled
environment. The verifier assumes that an attacker may be able to:

* read, copy, delete, replace, or edit local license files;
* provide license data through ``LicenseLocation``;
* set process environment variables such as ``LICENSE_LOCATION`` or
  ``LICENSE_DATA`` when the host application enables those lookup paths;
* run the licensed application on a different machine, virtual machine, or
  container;
* change the local wall clock; and
* inspect the application binary and public verification key.

The verifier must fail closed for malformed, ambiguous, or tampered license
data. A license grants access only after all of these checks succeed:

* the target product or feature section is present;
* the license format version is supported;
* all license keys are known, canonical, and present at most once;
* fields such as dates, versions, base64 signatures, and hardware identifiers
  have valid shape;
* the signature verifies over the canonical data used by the supported license
  format; and
* time, version, hardware identifier, and project magic constraints match the
  caller.

Licensecc is a local licensing library, not a complete anti-tamper system. A
local attacker who can patch the application binary, replace the linked
library, or intercept the result of ``acquire_license`` can bypass local
authorization decisions. High-value products should combine local checks with
server-side entitlement checks, telemetry, or application hardening outside the
scope of this library.

The extended ``acquire_license_ex`` API adds best-effort runtime tamper
signals for host integration. These signals improve diagnostics and can fail
closed when the host explicitly opts into enforcement, but they are still local
checks and do not make a fully controlled machine trustworthy.

``acquire_license_ex`` can also run opt-in online verification after a local
license succeeds. Licensecc core does not perform HTTP. Instead, it creates a
nonce-bound ``LccOnlineRequest`` and calls a host-provided transport callback.
The callback may contact a service such as the reference Cloudflare Worker, then
returns a signed server assertion to Licensecc. Licensecc verifies the assertion
offline with the configured public key before applying the online policy.

The ``LccOnlineRequest`` may carry an optional ``client_hardening`` bitset
(``LCC_CLIENT_HARDENING_*``) describing the client's hardening *configuration*:
tamper enforcement enabled, a host-integrity callback present, strict source
shadowing, and online verification required. The verifier *records* this bitset
for audit and operator visibility, but it does **not** use it for allow/deny
decisions because a client controls — and can therefore spoof — its own posture.
The bitset is never part of the signed assertion and carries no PII; only the
enumerated bits are reported.

Online verification improves server-side entitlement checks, revocation
diagnostics, and rollout visibility. It still does not make a patched binary,
hooked API, replaced library, or fully controlled local machine trustworthy.
When a host supplies ``online_check``, Licensecc requires a fresh valid signed
assertion. Transport failure, entitlement denial, malformed assertions, expired
assertions, or rollback below the in-process revocation floor fail closed.

The C++ verifier remembers the highest accepted online ``revocation-seq`` for a
given project, feature, and license fingerprint for the lifetime of the current
process. This rejects lower-sequence fresh or cached assertions after a newer
assertion has been seen. The floor is not persisted by Licensecc core across
process restarts when hosts call ``acquire_license_ex`` directly.

Hosts that need restart-resilient rollback detection should use
``lcc_acquire_license_decision``. That wrapper requires host callbacks that load
and store the strongest accepted ``revocation_seq`` for the exact
project/feature/license-fingerprint tuple. The wrapper compares fresh online
assertions against the loaded floor and fails closed if the host cannot store a
newly accepted floor. This improves rollback detection across normal restarts,
but it still cannot protect a machine where the application binary, callback
implementation, or stored floor has been fully patched by the attacker.

Production online verification should use a dedicated online assertion signing
key. Configure the C++ verifier with
``LCC_ONLINE_ASSERTION_PUBLIC_KEY_RECORDS`` generated by the Cloudflare verifier
key helper. Builds without a configured online assertion key ring fail closed
for online assertions instead of silently trusting the local license-issuing
key.

Trust boundaries
================

The private signing key belongs only in the license issuing environment. It
must not be installed with the customer application, included in SDKs, or
stored in public source packages. The customer application needs only the public
verification key compiled into the project-specific ``licensecc`` build.

Project initialization writes ``private_key.rsa`` as an issuer-side secret.
Where the platform supports POSIX file modes, the key file is created with
owner-only permissions. The key is not encrypted by Licensecc today, so the
issuer environment must protect the project directory with host filesystem
permissions, backups policy, and access controls. Release and customer builds
should use an existing issuer-generated project or a projects directory outside
the source tree. Creating a new private key under the source tree requires the
explicit CMake opt-in ``LCC_ALLOW_SOURCE_TREE_KEYGEN``.

License files are integrity-protected by a signature, but they are not
confidential. Do not place secrets in ``extra-data`` or other license fields.

Environment-provided license paths and license data are convenient for tests,
support, and embedded deployments, but they inherit the trust level of the
process environment. Hardened generated projects default these lookup paths
off with ``FIND_LICENSE_WITH_ENV_VAR=false``. Production applications that do
not trust their environment should leave this default in place and provide an
explicit, administrator-controlled license location or a colocated license
file. Enable environment lookup with
``lcc_set_environment_license_sources_enabled(true)`` only for trusted
compatibility, support, or test workflows.

Multiple license sources
========================

When more than one lookup path is enabled, Licensecc uses a compatibility
policy rather than a source-fatal policy. It evaluates every configured
candidate in this order:

* license file near the application module;
* paths from ``LICENSE_LOCATION``, when environment lookup is enabled;
* license data from ``LICENSE_DATA``, when environment lookup is enabled; and
* the explicit ``LicenseLocation`` supplied to ``acquire_license``.

Malformed candidates are recorded in the audit log. If at least one candidate
validates successfully, ``acquire_license`` returns ``LICENSE_OK`` and the
malformed candidates remain visible as ``SVRT_WARN`` audit events. If no
candidate validates, malformed candidates are promoted to errors and the result
is the most relevant failure such as ``LICENSE_MALFORMED`` or
``LICENSE_FILE_NOT_FOUND``.

This preserves deployments that intentionally provide fallback licenses while
still exposing diagnostics to callers. Applications that require a
source-fatal policy should call
``lcc_set_strict_source_fatal_enabled(true)`` before ``acquire_license``. In
that mode malformed or invalid-format source events remain fatal even when
another source verifies successfully, so explicit license data and temporarily
enabled environment sources cannot be silently masked by a fallback license.

Runtime anti-tamper signals
===========================

``acquire_license_ex`` runs the normal license verifier first. Runtime tamper
checks are evaluated only after the license would otherwise return
``LICENSE_OK``, so malformed, expired, corrupted, missing, or hardware-mismatch
license failures keep their original result codes.

Initialize ``LicenseCheckOptions`` with
``lcc_init_license_check_options``. The default policy is
``LCC_TAMPER_ENFORCE`` with strict source shadowing enabled. Tamper signals are
exported as ``SVRT_ERROR`` and return ``LICENSE_TAMPER_DETECTED``. Set
``tamper_policy = LCC_TAMPER_DISABLED`` only for compatibility tests or trusted
diagnostics.

Version 1 supports two offline-first signals:

* a host-provided ``LCC_HOST_INTEGRITY_CHECK`` callback returning ``false``;
* ``LCC_TAMPER_FLAG_STRICT_SOURCE_SHADOWING``, which reports a malformed or
  invalid-format candidate that was shadowed by a later valid fallback source.

Licensecc deliberately does not add generic debugger, virtual-machine,
process-list, module-injection, self-hash, or monotonic-clock checks to the core
runtime. Those policies are product-specific and should be implemented by the
host callback if the host needs them.

The project magic check remains a linkage and simple-library-swap diagnostic,
not a secret. A mismatch fails closed as ``LICENSE_CORRUPTED``. v201 signed
metadata tampering remains a deterministic license failure through
``LICENSE_MALFORMED`` or ``LICENSE_CORRUPTED``, depending on whether the
tampered data is malformed or signature-validating data has changed.

Local date checks use the local system clock. They are suitable for normal
expiry and not-before enforcement, but they can be bypassed by an attacker who
controls the machine clock unless the host application adds an external time
authority.

Hardware binding
================

Hardware identifiers are machine-binding hints, not secrets. They are useful to
detect accidental copying and ordinary relocation to another machine. They are
not proof of identity against a determined local attacker.

Malformed hardware identifiers in a signed license are treated as
``LICENSE_MALFORMED``. A well-formed identifier that does not match the current
machine is treated as ``IDENTIFIERS_MISMATCH``.

The current supported hardware identifier strategies are Ethernet address,
IP address, and disk identifier. IP-address based binding is weaker than disk
or Ethernet binding because IP addresses are often mutable or reused. Disk
labels are also weak binding data and are disabled as label-only identifiers by
default. Treat environment-selected hardware strategies as support or
compatibility tools unless the issuing process explicitly allows them.

Host names and OS-level machine IDs are not supported binding strategies in
v200. They are mutable, commonly cloned with VM or disk images, and may reveal
personal or internal asset information. They are reserved for diagnostics or a
future salted/source-strength-tagged identifier format, not for current
license enforcement.

The license generator therefore rejects IP-address identifiers by default. Use
``--allow-ip-binding`` only when the operator intentionally accepts that weaker
binding. Identifiers generated through the ``IDENTIFICATION_STRATEGY``
environment variable are also rejected by default and require
``--allow-env-selected-binding`` for explicit support or compatibility flows.
Weak disk fallback such as label-only data or mutable Windows volume serial
data is disabled by default, is marked in the identifier, and requires
``--allow-weak-disk-label-binding`` at issuance. v201 licenses sign
``client-signature-source-strength`` and the runtime checks it against the
encoded identifier before hardware matching.

Version 200 compatibility
=========================

``lic_ver = 200`` is the legacy license file format currently accepted by the
reader. Existing valid v200 licenses remain compatible, but hardened v200
parsing rejects license data that is ambiguous, malformed, or not part of the
documented v200 field set.

A v200 license section may contain only these keys:

* ``lic_ver``
* ``valid-from``
* ``valid-to``
* ``client-signature``
* ``start-version``
* ``end-version``
* ``extra-data``
* ``sig``

Keys must be lowercase and canonical. Unknown keys, duplicate keys, uppercase
or mixed-case keys, missing signatures, empty signatures, invalid base64
signatures, malformed dates, malformed version bounds, malformed hardware
identifiers, and unsupported license format versions fail closed.

The raw v200 reader intentionally accepts only a small compatibility grammar:

* LF and CRLF line endings are accepted.
* Blank lines and full-line comments beginning with ``;`` or ``#`` are ignored.
* Product and feature section lookup is case-insensitive. A duplicate requested
  section is malformed. A malformed unrelated section is ignored until that
  section is requested and never grants access to another feature.
* Key names must be exactly lowercase and from the allowlist above. There must
  be no leading key whitespace, no tab spacing, and no more than one ASCII
  space before ``=``.
* These delimiter forms are accepted for compatibility:
  ``key=value``, ``key= value``, ``key =value``, and the generator's
  ``key = value``.
* After the optional single delimiter space, values must have no leading or
  trailing whitespace. Inline comments are part of the value and therefore make
  canonical fields such as dates, ``lic_ver``, and ``sig`` malformed.
* ``lic_ver`` must be exactly ``200``. ``sig`` must be canonical base64 with no
  whitespace or line breaks. Date fields must be canonical ``YYYY-MM-DD``.
* Raw license data containing embedded NUL bytes is malformed. v200 key names,
  ``lic_ver``, ``sig``, date fields, version fields, hardware identifiers, and
  other validated control fields use an ASCII byte grammar; non-ASCII bytes in
  those fields are not portable and fail closed when they reach validation.

The public result for malformed v200 syntax in the requested section is
``LICENSE_MALFORMED``. A missing requested section is
``PRODUCT_NOT_LICENSED``. These hardened checks may reject older hand-edited
or parser-normalized license files that previous versions tolerated; issuers
should regenerate affected licenses with the current generator instead of
patching license text by hand.

The signed ``extra-data`` field is returned through the public
``LicenseInfo.proprietary_data`` buffer. It is not confidential and must fit in
the configured public ABI payload size, which is 16 bytes by default. Empty,
oversized, control-character-bearing, embedded-NUL, leading-whitespace, and
trailing-whitespace values fail closed with ``LICENSE_MALFORMED``. The runtime
does not silently truncate signed ``extra-data`` into the public output buffer.

The v200 signature payload is retained for compatibility. New cryptographic
metadata such as algorithm identifiers or key identifiers must not be added to
v200 licenses because hardened v200 readers reject unknown fields. Future
signature or canonicalization changes should use a new license format version
with an explicit migration policy.

The v201 canonical payload is stricter: canonical field keys are lowercase
ASCII names from the v201 allowlist, and canonical field values must be
printable ASCII bytes only (``0x20`` through ``0x7e``). Control bytes,
embedded NUL, DEL, and high-bit bytes are rejected by both the runtime and the
generator before signed bytes are accepted or emitted. v201 does not interpret
license files as UTF-8; any future need for international text should define an
explicit encoded field rather than placing raw non-ASCII bytes in signed
canonical values.

For v201 optional fields, malformed dates, inverted date ranges, malformed
version bounds, and inverted version ranges are canonical-payload errors and
fail as ``LICENSE_MALFORMED`` before signature verification. A non-empty
``client-signature`` must be paired with signed
``client-signature-source-strength`` metadata. Malformed or empty
``client-signature`` values, inconsistent source-strength metadata, and empty
or oversized ``extra-data`` values can be represented in the storage format;
when their canonical payload verifies, the runtime still rejects them during
limit validation with ``LICENSE_MALFORMED``. Absent optional fields remain
distinct from present-but-empty fields.

Version limits
==============

Version bounds are enforced when a license contains ``start-version`` or
``end-version``. In that case the caller must provide
``CallerInformations.version``. Supported version values contain one to three
numeric components separated by dots, for example ``1``, ``1.2``, or
``1.2.3``. Each component may contain up to four digits.

The bounds are inclusive. A missing, malformed, below-range, or above-range
caller version fails with ``PRODUCT_NOT_LICENSED``. Malformed version bounds in
the license fail with ``LICENSE_MALFORMED``.
